In chapter 7, we looked at regression models for predicting a quantitative response
variable from quantitative predictor variables

But there’s no reason that we
couldn’t have included nominal or ordinal factors as predictors as well

When factors
are included as explanatory variables, our focus usually shifts from prediction
to understanding group differences, and the methodology is referred to as analysis
of variance (ANOVA). ANOVA methodology is used to analyze a wide variety of experimental
and quasi-experimental designs. This chapter provides an overview of R
functions for analyzing common research designs.

understanding group difference

In addition to the base installation, you’ll be using the car, gplots, HH, rrcov,
multicomp, effects, MASS, and mvoutlier packages in the examples. Be sure to install
them before trying out the sample code.

Treatment is a between-groups factor with two levels (CBT, EMDR).

STAI is the dependent variable, and Treatment is the independent variable.
balanced design
unbalanced design.

Treatment
CBT EMDR
s1 s6
s2 s7
s3 s8
s4 s9
s5 s10

The statistical design in table 9.1 is called a
one-way ANOVA because there’s a single classification
variable. Specifically, it’s a one-way
between-groups ANOVA. Effects in ANOVA
designs are primarily evaluated through F
tests. If the F test for Treatment is significant,
you can conclude that the mean STAI scores
for two therapies differed after five weeks of
treatment.


If you were interested in the effect of CBT on
anxiety over time, you could place all 10
patients in the CBT group and assess them at
the conclusion of therapy and again six months
later. This design is displayed in table 9.2.
Table 9.2 One-way within-groups ANOVA

Patient
Time
5 weeks 6 months
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
s7
s8
s9
s10

Time is a within-groups factor with two levels (five weeks, six months). It’s called a
within-groups factor because each patient is measured under both levels. The statistical
design is a one-way within-groups ANOVA. Because each subject is measured more
than once, the design is also called a repeated measures ANOVA. If the F test for Time is
significant, you can conclude that patients’ mean STAI scores changed between five
weeks and six months.


By including both Therapy and Time as factors, you’re able to examine the impact
of Therapy (averaged across time), Time (averaged across therapy type), and the
interaction of Therapy and Time. The first two are called the main effects, whereas the
interaction is (not surprisingly) called an interaction effect.


When you cross two or more factors, as is done here, you have a factorial ANOVA
design. Crossing two factors produces a two-way ANOVA, crossing three factors produces
a three-way ANOVA, and so forth. When a factorial design includes both
between-groups and within-groups factors, it’s also called a mixed-model ANOVA. The
current design is a two-way mixed-model factorial ANOVA (phew!).


Table 9.3 Two-way factorial ANOVA with one between-groups and one within-groups factor
Patient
              Time
          5 weeks 6 months
Therapy
CBT
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
EMDR
s6
s7
s8
s9
s10


In this case, you’ll have three F tests: one for Therapy, one for Time, and one for
the Therapy × Time interaction. A significant result for Therapy indicates that CBT
and EMDR differ in their impact on anxiety. A significant result for Time indicates that
anxiety changed from week five to the six-month follow-up. A significant Therapy ×
Time interaction indicates that the two treatments for anxiety had a differential
impact over time (that is, the change in anxiety from five weeks to six months was different
for the two treatments).

it’s a confounding factor
it’s called a nuisance variable

If you recorded depression levels using a self-report depression measure such as
the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) when patients were recruited, you could statistically
adjust for any treatment group differences in depression before assessing the
impact of therapy type. In this case, BDI would be called a covariate, and the design
would be called an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA).

Although ANOVA and regression methodologies developed separately, functionally
they’re both special cases of the general linear model. You could analyze ANOVA models
using the same lm() function used for regression in chapter 7. But you’ll primarily
use the aov() function in this chapter. The results of lm() and aov() are equivalent,
but the aov() function presents these results in a format that’s more familiar to
ANOVA methodologists. For completeness, I’ll provide an example using lm() at the
end of this chapter

The syntax of the aov() function is aov(formula, data=dataframe). Table 9.4
describes special symbols that can be used in the formulas. In this table, y is the
dependent variable and the letters A, B, and C represent factors.


~ Separates response variables on the left from the explanatory variables on the
right. For example, a prediction of y from A, B, and C would be coded
y ~ A + B + C
: Denotes an interaction between variables. A prediction of y from A, B, and the
interaction between A and B would be coded
y ~ A + B + A:B
* Denotes the complete crossing variables. The code y ~ A*B*C expands to
y ~ A + B + C + A:B + A:C + B:C + A:B:C
^ Denotes crossing to a specified degree. The code y ~ (A+B+C)^2 expands to
y ~ A + B + C + A:B + A:C + A:B
. Denotes all remaining variables. The code y ~ . expands to
y ~ A + B + C
Special symbols used in R formulas
In this table, y is the
dependent variable and the letters A, B, and C represent factors.

Table 9.5 provides formulas for several common research designs. In this table, lowercase
letters are quantitative variables, uppercase letters are grouping factors, and
Subject is a unique identifier variable for subjects.

Table 9.5 Formulas for common research designs
Design Formula
One-way ANOVA y ~ A
One-way ANCOVA with 1 covariate y ~ x + A
Two-way factorial ANOVA y ~ A * B
Two-way factorial ANCOVA with 2 covariates y ~ x1 + x2 + A * B
Randomized block y ~ B + A (where B is a blocking factor)
One-way within-groups ANOVA y ~ A + Error(Subject/A)
Repeated measures ANOVA with 1 within-groups
factor (W) and 1 between-groups factor (B)
y ~ B * W + Error(Subject/W)

By default, R employs the Type I (sequential) approach to calculating ANOVA
effects (see the sidebar “Order counts!”). The first model can be written as y ~ A + B
+ A:B. The resulting R ANOVA table will assess
■ The impact of A on y
■ The impact of B on y, controlling for A
■ The interaction of A and B, controlling for the A and B main effects



Order counts!
When independent variables are correlated with each other or with covariates, there’s
no unambiguous method for assessing the independent contributions of these variables
to the dependent variable. Consider an unbalanced two-way factorial design with
factors A and B and dependent variable y. There are three effects in this design: the
A and B main effects and the A × B interaction. Assuming that you’re modeling the
data using the formula
Y ~ A + B + A:B
there are three typical approaches for partitioning the variance in y among the effects
on the right side of this equation.
TYPE I (SEQUENTIAL)
Effects are adjusted for those that appear earlier in the formula. A is unadjusted. B
is adjusted for the A. The A:B interaction is adjusted for A and B.
TYPE II (HIERARCHICAL)
Effects are adjusted for other effects at the same or lower level. A is adjusted for B.
B is adjusted for A. The A:B interaction is adjusted for both A and B.
TYPE III (MARGINAL)
Each effect is adjusted for every other effect in the model. A is adjusted for B and
A:B. B is adjusted for A and A:B. The A:B interaction is adjusted for A and B.
R employs the Type I approach by default. Other programs such as SAS and SPSS
employ the Type III approach by default.


In general, more fundamental effects should be
listed earlier in the formula. In particular, covariates should be listed first, followed by
main effects, followed by two-way interactions, followed by three-way interactions, and
so on. For main effects, more fundamental variables should be listed first. Thus gender
would be listed before treatment. Here’s the bottom line: when the research
design isn’t orthogonal (that is, when the factors and/or covariates are correlated), be
careful when specifying the order of effects.


When performing statistical analysis, independent variables that affect a particular dependent variable are said to be orthogonal 
if they are uncorrelated

Before moving on to specific examples, note that the Anova() function in the car
package (not to be confused with the standard anova() function) provides the option
of using the Type II or Type III approach, rather than the Type I approach used by the
aov() function. You may want to use the Anova() function if you’re concerned about
matching your results to those provided by other packages such as SAS and SPSS. See
help(Anova, package="car") for details.


In a one-way ANOVA, you’re interested in comparing the dependent variable means of
two or more groups defined by a categorical grouping factor


Looking at the output, you can
see that 10 patients received each
of the drug regimens b. From
the means, it appears that drugE
produced the greatest cholesterol
reduction, whereas 1time produced
the least c. Standard deviations
were relatively constant
across the five groups, ranging
from 2.88 to 3.48 d. The ANOVA
F test for treatment (trt) is significant
(p < .0001), providing evidence
that the five treatments
aren’t all equally effective e.
The plotmeans() function in
the gplots package can be used
to produce a graph of group
means and their confidence
intervals f. A plot of the treatment
means, with 95% confidence limits, is provided in figure 9.1 and allows you to
clearly see these treatment differences


















































































































